# A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Optimization-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability

### Introduction

This project objetive is to build a ML model that allows a hospital to understand its bed availability at a certain point in time by predicting when currently hospitalized patient's will be discharged based on their clinic history as well as environmental factors and historic trends. This  information is crucial for a hospital's management team in order to improve their bed capacity management efficiencies.

PSA: Data will not be published as it was provided by a health center under a Non-Disclosure-Agreement. 

### Table of contents


* [ETL](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/tree/master/ETL):
This folder contains the different jobs that take part into the Extract, Transform and Load process of this project. 

  * [preprocess_db](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/ETL/preprocess_db.py): This job takes the raw database, as provided by the medical institution, and process it in several ways in order to have a more scalable, consistent and clean data for our project. Main steps of this job are: 
    1. columns renaming (so that columns names are consistent across the different datasets). 
    2. casting columns to the appropiate datatype 
    3. dropping irrelevant columns (repeated columns, empty columns, static columns).
    4. generating new columns (by combining the already available columms, for example datetime columns are created).
    5. exporting the datasets in .parquet files (binary, faster to read file format).
   
  * [clinic_histories](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/ETL/clinic_histories.py): This job reads the .parquet files generated by the previous job and for each patient in the database, generates his daily records with his information point-in-time-correct (studies done, diganosis received, time spent at the hospital, physicians who have treated him, etc.). The records are saved for each patient under a patient id named file.
  
  * [dataset](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/ETL/dataset.py): This jobs reads patients historic records and build a dataset by combining all patient historic records with other time independent variables as patient gender, and patient idependent variables as day of the week. It then splits the created dataset into three sets: training, validation and testing. This partition is done in a time basis, aiming to replicate the conditions of the model application.
  
  The functions used in each of the jobs above described are organized into the [etl_helpers](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/tree/master/ETL/etl_helpers) folder.



* [thesis_lib](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/tree/master/thesis_lib): 
This library contains classes that were exclusively created to work with this project. So far it consists of two modules: 

   * [visual](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/thesis_lib/visual.py): This module contains plotting functions used primarily for exploration of the available datasets.
   * [hospital_classes](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/thesis_lib/hospital_classes.py) This module contain two classes:
     1. Patient class: This class is aimed to enclose attributes and methods related to a patient. The class is initialized by providing a valid patient_id. Each patient has the propery `admission history` which consists of a dictionary of his admissions accessed through their admission ids.
     2. Admission class: This class is aimed to enclose attributes and methods related to an admission of a patient. The class is initialized by providing a valid admission id and its corresponding object of Patient class. Thus, both classes are related to each other in a complementary way. 
     
     
* [model](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/tree/master/model) This folder contains the different notebooks used so far to approach the modeling problem. 

  * [Exploration](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/model/Exploratory.ipynb): In this notebook the different datasets provided by the medical institution are explored with the intention of getting a general understanding of the information we have at our disposal.
  
  * [MVP](https://github.com/josedallavia/A-Machine-Learning-Approach-for-Prediction-of-Hospital-Bed-Availability/blob/master/model/MVP.ipynb): In this notebook, a first end-to-end machine learning model is built and trained, and its performance is reported. 




